Cities as information-management devices
Extract from Emergence, Steven Johnson.

"From its origin onward", Lewis Mumford writes in his classic work The city in history, "the city may be described as a structure specially equipped to store and transmits the goods of civilization". 

Preemnint among the "goods" sored and transmitted by the city is the invaluable material of information: current prices in the marketplace; laborsaing devices dreamed up by craftsmen; new remedies for disease. This knack for capturing information, and for  bringing related pocket of information together defines how cities learn. Like-minded business cluster together because there are financial incetives to do so - what academics call economies of agglomeration - enabling craftsmen to share techniques and services that they wouldn't necessarily be able to enjoy on their own. that clustering becomes a self-perpetuating cycle: potential consumers and employees have an easier time finding the goods and jobs they're looking for ; the shared information makes the clustered businesses more competitive than isolated ones.

There are manifest purposes to a city - reasons for being that its citizens are usually aware of: they come for the protection of the walled city, or the open trade of the marketplace. 

**But cities have a latent purpose as well: to function as information storage  and retrieval devices. Cities were creating user-friendly interfaces thousands of years before anyone dreamed of digital computers. Cities bring mind together and put them into coherent slots.** 

Cobblers gathers near other cobblers, and button-makers near other button makers. Ideas and good flow readily within these clusters, leading to productive cross-pollination, ensuring that good ideas don't die out in rural isolation. The power unleashed by this data storage is evident in the earliest large-scale human settlements, locate in the Sumerian coast and in the Indus valley, which dates back to 3500 B.C. By some account, grain cultivation, the plow, the potter's wheel, the sailboat, the draw loom, copper metallurgy, abstract mathematics, exact astronomical observation, the calendar - all of these inventionq appeared within centuries of the original urban populations. It's possible, even likely, that more isolated  groups or individuals had stumbled upon some of those technologies at an earlier date, but they didn't become part of the collective intelligence of civilization until there were cities  to store and transmit them.

**The neighborhood system of a city functions as a kind of user interface for the same reason that traditionnal computer interfaces do: there are limits to how much information our brains can handle at any given time.** 

We need visual interfaces  on our desktop computers because the sheer quantity of information stored on our hard drives - not to mention the Net itself - greatly exceeds the carrying capacity of the human mind. 

**Cities are a solution to a comparable problem, both on the level of the collective and individual.**

Cities store and transmit usefulnew ideas to the wider population, ensuring that powerful new technologies don't disappear once the've been invented. But the self-organizing clusters of neighborhoodsalso serve to mae cities more intelligible to the individuals that inhabit them (...). The specilization of the city makes it smarter, more useful for its inhibitants. And the extraordinary thing again is that this learning emerges without anyone being aware of it. Information management - subduing the complexity of a large-scale human settlement is the *latent* purpose of a city, because when cities comes into being, their inhabitants are driven by other motives, such as safety or trade. No one founds a city with the explicit intent of storing information more efficiently, or making its social organization more palatable for the limited bandwidth of the human mind. That data management only happens later, as a kind of collective afterthought: yet another macrobehavior that can't be predicted from the micromotives. Cities may function like libraries and interfaces, but they are not built with that explicit aim.
Indeed traditionnal cities (...) are rarely built with any aim at all: they just happen. (...) They are the sum of thousand of local interactions: clustering, sharing , crowding, trading - all the disparate activities that coalesce into the totality of urban living.
