# THÉORIE DE L'ACTEUR-RÉSEAU

La théorie de l'acteur-réseau, aussi connue sous l'abréviation ANT (pour Actor-Network Theory) ou sociologie de la traduction, est une approche sociologique qui se distingue des théories sociologiques classiques parce qu'elle prend en compte dans son analyse, au-delà des humains, les objets (« non-humains ») et les discours. 

https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Th%C3%A9orie_de_l%27acteur-r%C3%A9seau

Actor–network theory (ANT) is a theoretical and methodological approach to social theory where everything in the social and natural worlds exists in constantly shifting networks of relationship.[1] It posits that nothing exists outside those relationships. All the factors involved in a social situation are on the same level, and thus there are no external social forces beyond what and how the network participants interact at present. Thus, objects, ideas, processes, and any other relevant factors are seen as just as important in creating social situations as humans. ANT holds that social forces do not exist in themselves, and therefore cannot be used to explain social phenomena. Instead, strictly empirical analysis should be undertaken to "describe" rather than "explain" social activity. Only after this can one introduce the concept of social forces, and only as an abstract theoretical concept, not something which genuinely exists in the world.[2] The fundamental aim of ANT is to explore how networks are built or assembled and maintained to achieve a specific objective.[3][4] Although it is best known for its controversial insistence on the capacity of nonhumans to act or participate in systems or networks or both, ANT is also associated with forceful critiques of conventional and critical sociology. Developed by science and technology studies (STS) scholars Michel Callon and Bruno Latour, the sociologist John Law, and others, it can more technically be described as a "material-semiotic" method. This means that it maps relations that are simultaneously material (between things) and semiotic (between concepts). It assumes that many relations are both material and semiotic.

Broadly speaking, ANT is a constructivist approach in that it avoids essentialist explanations of events or innovations (i.e. ANT explains a successful theory by understanding the combinations and interactions of elements that make it successful, rather than saying it is true and the others are false). Likewise, it is not a cohesive theory in itself.[5] Rather, ANT functions as a strategy that assists people in being sensitive to terms and the often unexplored assumptions underlying them.[6] It is distinguished from many other STS and sociological network theories for its distinct material-semiotic approach.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Actor%E2%80%93network_theory
